API-server audit log filtering policy in ClusterLogForwarder (#1374)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/cluster-logging/hypershift-audit-logs.md

---
title: hypershift-audit-logs
authors:
  - aconway@redhat.com
reviewers:
  - TBD
approvers:
  - TBD
api-approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2023-03-31
tracking-link:
  - TBD
see-also:
  - /enhancements/cluster-logging/api-audit-log-policy.md
---

# Hypershift Audit Logs

## Summary

In a self contained cluster, users can forward application, infrastructure and audit logs.
In a hypershift cluster, API server audit logs do not exist on the guest cluster,
they are generated in Hypershift Control Plane (HCP) pods on the management cluster.

This proposal deploys the existing cluster logging operator (CLO) on the management cluster.
It will forward HCP audit logs according to a policy and destination configured on the guest cluster,
and independently forward audit logs with the policy/ destination required by hypershift SD.

**NOTE**: This proposal depends on [api-audit-log-policy](/api-audit-log-policy.md)

## Motivation

> - Allow users and SREs with conflicting requirements to get the logs they need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allow audit logs consumers with different requirements to get the subset logs they need.
```

> - Forward API server logs from the management cluster, as they are not available on the guest cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Forward API server audit logs from the management cluster, as they are not available in the hosted cluster.
```
This is saying forward to the configured destination, not that we must forward to the data plane as an intermediate?

- Replace the SD Splunk forwarder with the CLO which is more flexible and feature-rich.

> - Centralize log forwarding in the logging project, give hypershift team control of their logging needs.

Reviewer: I don't see centralized forwarding necessarily as a motivation.  It's an optimization and an implementation detail.

### User Stories

> #### As a cluster owner, I want to store and/or forward selected API audit logs to my chosen destinations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### As a service consumer, I want to forward selected API audit logs to my chosen destinations.
```

> - configure API audit policy and forwarding using guest cluster resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- configure API audit policy and forwarding using logging customer resources in the hosted cluster.
```

- have the desired audit logs forwarded from the management cluster to my destination.

> #### As a Hypershift SRE, I want to control plane audit logs to go to my chosen destination with my policy.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### As a service provider, I want to forward selected API audit logs to my chosen destinations.
```

> - configure the SD internal audit policy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- configure the SD internal audit policy
- configure API audit policy and forwarding using namespaced logging customer resources in the management cluster.
```

Calling out namespaced resources here as we must keep in mind that management clusters _are_ OSD clusters right now.  The audit forwarding of the management cluster should leverage the non-hypreshift solution documented in this PR.  The MC is hosting many HCP.  These must be forwarded as well and the policy and configuration of outputs must be independent of the MC configuration.  For example, we have different types of events possibly and we ship to a different index in splunk.

> - forward logs to the SD internal destination (splunk)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - for example: Red Hat Service Delivery team forwards audit logs to internal splunk destination.
```

> - independent of user configuration.

Reviewer: This is to say configuration is independent of the customer (service consumer) configuration in the hosted cluster?

### Goals

> - Multiple separate audit policies. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Multiple audit policies can be defined in a management cluster, independent of hosted cluster policies.
- Multiple audit policies can be defined in a hosted cluster, independent of the management cluster policies.
```

  See [api-audit-log-policy](/api-audit-log-policy.md) for how the CLO will support this.

> - Control log forwarding from the _management_ cluster with configuration in the _guest_ cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Control log forwarding from the _management_ cluster with configuration in the _hosted_ cluster.
```

- Keep control of all management cluster forwarding on the management cluster.

>   - guest configuration requests forwarding, management cluster controls what is delivered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - hosted cluster configuration requests forwarding, management cluster controls what is delivered.
```

### Non-Goals

- Only API-server audit logs, no application, infrastructure or node audit logs.

> - May not support every possible log destination or configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- May not support every log destination or configuration supported by CLO today.
```

>   There may be restrictions imposed by the management cluster.

Reviewer: Is this restriction enforced by what is exposed in `HypershiftLogForwarder` or is there some other configuration option available to the service provider to further restrict functionality?

1. Deploy the new _hypershift logging operator_ (HLO)

The _hypershift logging operator_ watches for `HypershiftLogForwarder` and related `Policy.audit.k8s.io.` resources
in the _guest_ clusters (via the HCP API servers)
It reconciles by generating a `ClusterLogForwarder` in the HCP namespace.

The HLO only generates configuration.
The CLO in the management cluster does the log collection and forwarding.

### API Extensions

#### HypershiftLogForwarder

The `HyperShiftLogForwarder` resource is created on the _guest_ cluster, but is reconciled by
the _hypershift logging operator_ on the _management_ cluster.

This allows the user to specify audit forwarding configuration, but the management
cluster controls if/how it is implemented in the HCP.

`HyperShiftLogForwarder` is a subset of the `ClusterLogForwarder` API:
- Only the `audit` input is allowed, and only API server audit logs will be forwarded.
- There may be restrictions on the set of outputs supported from the management cluster.
  - Possibly only a predefined set of named outputs will be allowed.
- There may be restrictions on pipeline features that are not relevant to API audit logs.

### Implementation Details

> #### ClusterLogForwarder multiple instances

Reviewer: The functionality needed on the MC is captured in the `HypershiftLogForwarder`.  Could that CR be used in each HCP NS to aggregate everything?

1. SD wites a HLF to the HCP NS with the audit forwarding needed to splunk.  
2. Customer writes HLF in the hosted cluster with the customer forwarding needs.
3. HLO watches the hosted cluster HLF and adds to the HLF already created, in the status.  If HLF doesn't exist, one is created with no spec.

Something like this would mean CLF isn't changed, no breaking API changes to deal with.  All the configuration ends up in one place.  It's local to the HCP, so authentication (STS) is fine.  No need for transformation, the CRDs will be the same in the management cluster and hosted cluster.

so it can receive logs as a web hook from the API server in the HCP.

_FIXME JIRA reference_

_FIXME Is there a way to use the file system and avoid this requirement?_

#### Hypershift Logging Operator

This operator must
- watch resources in a HCP API server, update their status 
  - `HypershiftLogForwarder` 
  - `Policy.audit.k8s.io`
- create resources in the management cluster API server
  - `ClusterLogForwarder`
  - `Policy.audit.k8s.io`

The policy objects can be copied verbatim. 

The `HypershiftLogForwarder` fields are compatible with `ClusterLogForwarder` fields but some changes
and validation may be needed:
- validate that the forwarding request is valid and allowed.
- possibly replace named outputs with a suitable output configuration;
  if we want to restrict the user to a fixed set of alternatives
- possibly add credentials derived from the guest cluster or the management cluster.
  
### Risks and Mitigations

CPU/Network cost of extra log forwarding
- We have to do this anyway, but user might choose a more verbose policy.
- We could restrict the available logs at the API server to control this.

### Drawbacks

## Design Details

### Open Questions

> - Is there any way to write the audit logs to a file system that the log forwarder can read?

Reviewer: Sure but you need a webhook still per HCP to recieve the events and write to a filesystem.  If you do a sidecar we have problems of order of containers starting in the pod.  This is solved with the webhook provided by kube.

  This would be simpler & more reliable than a web hook.

> - Can an operator on the management cluster reconcile and update status on resources in the guest cluster directly?

Reviewer: Yes, but this is privileged as it requires access to kube credentials for each HCP and cross NS permissions to access each HCP.  Before doing this it needs run by SRE security, prodsec, compliance.

Author: This is so the HLO on the management cluster to reconcile the HypershiftLogForwarders on the hosted clusters.
Agreed it needs to be secured properly, that's an issue with CLO in general as it has access to a lot of potentially sensitive logs.

  The API server is running in the HCP on the management cluster, but need to check for possible snags.

> - Should we allow the user to specify any destination for logs from the management cluster? If not:

Reviewer: In what ways would we need to restrict destinations?  The limitations will need to be on what network paths are available from the management cluster.  The MC can talk to the destination directly.  Configuration of any network paths by the service consumer to facilitate this must be out of scope of this enhancement.

Author: It is very possible there are no restrictions needed. I had a vague idea that there might be connection issues from "different" clusters, but you are correct that if the destination is reachable from the MC then there's no reason we can't forward to it.

   - Why not? We allow that freedom on self contained clusters. I see no new security/privacy issues.
   - We can instead provide a fixed set of named alternatives. The `HyperShiftLoggingOperator`
     can translate those names into known configurations.
- How do we manage credentials? Assuming they are stored in the HCP API server, can the management cluster

>   access secrets for TLS security and the like? If not how do we get at them.

Reviewer: Recieving events from the HCP APIs will be via webhook specific to that HCP.  After that is processed it's up to how we architect this solution with respect to how CLO receives the events.

The challenge is when we look at authentication to various destinations.  The solution needs to support things like CloudWatch for ROSA HCP.  This requires STS, which requires a token per HCP.  Tokens expire after 60 minutes.  CLO will need to refresh tokens from each HCP.  We have code for this in the current solution (on gitlab) that can be referenced.

Author: +1. The CLF resource references all the relevant credentials and connection info, the HLF resource would do the same. See other proposal: The HLO on the MC would use the HLF from the hosed cluster as a template to construct a CLF in the HCP that does the actual forwarding.

### Test Plan

### Graduation Criteria

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

#### Tech Preview -> GA

#### Removing a deprecated feature

None.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Nothing new.

### Version Skew Strategy

Nothing new.

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

> An operator on the management server that watches objects on the guest cluster is new (is it?)

Reviewer: It's not new depending on who you ask :) 
SRE have several operators running in each HCP and there are the HCP components themselves, which run as pods on the MC and connect to the HCP API.

Author: Glad to hear it! I felt like it should be possible but didn't know if it had been done.

Since the guest API server runs in the HCP on the management server, it seems this should be possible,
but there may be some hidden snags.

This proposal requires 2 new operators to run on management clusters:
CLO and HyperShiftLoggingOperator.

> The custom Splunk forwarder will be removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The custom Splunk forwarder operator and splunk audit exporter webhook will be removed.
```

#### Failure Modes

- Invalid `HyperShiftLogForwarder.spec`: Indicate in `HyperShiftLogForwarder.status`
- Invalid policy reference or policy: Indicate in `HyperShiftLogForwarder.status`

#### Support Procedures

TBD

## Implementation History

None.

## Alternatives

The current work around solves the immediate problem (Cloudwatch yes-or-no), but is not a good long term solution:

> - Requires a call to support to enable, can't be controlled from guest cluster.

Reviewer: Phase 2 of the work will enable self service.

- Custom Cloudwatch client code hastily added to splunk exporter duplicates a CLO feature.
- Exporter was not intended to be a client, just a log filter.

> - SD splunk forwarder duplicates Splunk output in the CLO.

Reviewer: But adds the ability to filter, which is critical for our use case.

Author: Agreed - and to customer use cases also. Hence the goal of transplanting it to the CLO where all can benefit.

> - Was rushed to support 2 fixed outputs - Splunk and Cloudwatch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Was rushed to add support for Cloudwatch
```

  - hosted cluster has no direct access to control plane configuration.
  - data plane resources can request forwarding by the management cluster.
  - management cluster HLO automatically validates data-plane requests, and enables them if they are safe.

### Non-Goals

- This proposal only covers API audit logs. No change to application, infrastructure or node audit logs.
- Management cluster is not _required_ to honour all possible forwarding configurations allowed by CLF. \
  Whether or how to restricting management cluster forwarding is an operational decision.

## Proposal

### Workflow Description

#### Hosted Cluster, data plane

1. Deploy the CLO as usual.
1. Create a `Policy.audit.k8s.io` resource with the desired policy
   (see [api-audit-log-policy](/api-audit-log-policy.md))
1. Create a `HypershiftLogForwarder` (HLF) resource with an `audit` input linked to the policy. \
   The `HypershiftLogForwarder` API is a restricted subset of the `ClusterLogForwarder` API
1. Create HLF `outputs` and `pipelines` to forward the resulting logs.
1. Optionally create a `ClusterLogForwarder` to forward non-API logs as usual.

#### Management Cluster

> 1. Deploy the CLO, all name-spaces.

Reviewer: What does this mean?  Is it that CLO is watching all namespaces?

Author: Yep - the CLF is namespace-scoped

1. Deploy the new Hypershift Logging Operator (HLO), watching all namespaces.

> 1. Create a single `HypershiftLogWatcher` resource containing a template for HCP logging.

Reviewer: I read "single" as "singleton instance".  This means we have a single template for forwarding configuration that must be shared across all HCP on that management cluster.  We need to make this namespace scoped.  Deployment of that resource is a concern for the service provider.  It provides flexibility at a HCP level.

Author: Fixed - instance per HCP as discussed.

See "Implementation Details" for more details.

### API Extensions

#### HypershiftLogForwarder

The `HyperShiftLogForwarder` resource is created on the data plane (hosted cluster),
but is reconciled by the HLO on the _management_ cluster.

This allows the service consumer to provide forwarding configuration,
but leaves the service provider in control of whether to implement it in the HCP.

`HyperShiftLogForwarder` is a subset of the `ClusterLogForwarder` API:
- Only the `audit` input is allowed, and only API server audit logs will be forwarded.
- Any pipeline/output features that cannot be used with an `audit` input are disabled.

> - The service provider MAY impose additional restrictions on supported log targets, security restrictions etc.

Reviewer: 1. what are the base set of output types that is supported in HLF?
2. how does the service provider restrict the supported output types?

SRE needs splunk as an output.  If we know this is in scope I would like it listed so that is clear.  Also from customers I am hearing CloudWatch and syslog.

Author: I will remove the talk of out restrictions, if it turns out we do need such restrictions we can introduce them later. 
It was an idea I had at the beginning but it doesn't seem to be really necessary.

> #### HypershiftLogWatcher

Reviewer: The name is not intuitive even if it's a Global scope resource.  It's a template, so let it be called a template.

```suggestion
#### ClusterLogForwarderTemplate
```

- Copy/generate non-resource credentials required by the HLF
- Update `ClusterLogForwarder` resource in the HCP namespace (control plane) combining:
  - HLF configuration from the data plane (if present)
  - CLF template from the `HypershiftLogWatcher` from the control plane (if present)

The result is a CLF resource in each HCP namespace that combines valid service consumer configuration (from data plane)
with service provider configuration (from the control plane).

The CLO manages these resources as normal, by deploying collectors to forward logs.

#### Cluster Logging Operator

Two new CLO features are needed:

- **Multiple instances**: The ClusterLogForwarder is currently a singleton. \
  To provide isolation between HCPs we need to deploy a forwarder per HCP namespace.
  This requires modifications to the CLO.
  See [LOG-1343 Multiple forwarders](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-1343).

- **HTTP (aka webhook) server**: The ClusterLogForwarder needs to be extended to act a a HTTP listener,
  so it can receive logs as a web hook from the API server in the HCP.
  See [LOG-3965 Collector to act as http server](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-3965)

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Author: Will add a note on STS. 
I don't think we need to restrict output types available for the HLF initially. I noted early on that we _could_ enforce  restrictions if there was some case that was problematic, but so far I'm not aware of any. We can start by allowing everything and add restrictions if/when we need to.

**NOTE**: See also "Risks and Mitigations" in [api-audit-log-policy](/api-audit-log-policy.md)

### Drawbacks

## Design Details

### Open Questions

Need to ensure the management cluster can get credentials to connect to log outputs.
Credentials in Secrets are not a problem, but credentials that are magically auto-mounted in various ways may be tricky.
Need to review security requirements of existing outputs.

### Test Plan

### Graduation Criteria

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

#### Tech Preview -> GA

#### Removing a deprecated feature

None.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

> Upgrading: Existing customer `cl/instance` and `clf/instance` resources will not be modified.

Reviewer: How can this be true if CLF is moving from global to namespace scope?

Author: The CLF is already in namespace scope, but restricted to only deploy in the "openshift-logging" namespace with the name "instance", so there can be only one instance. We just need to lift that restriction and fix assumptions in the code about the constant namespace and name.

- configure API audit policy and forwarding using hosted cluster resource.
- have the desired audit logs forwarded from the management cluster to my destination.

#### As a service provider, I want to forward selected API audit logs to my chosen destinations
- configure the SD internal audit policy
- configure API audit policy and forwarding using name-spaced logging customer resources in the management cluster.
  - for example: Red Hat Service Delivery team forwards audit logs to internal splunk destination.
- independent of user configuration.

### Goals

- Multiple audit policies can be defined in a management cluster, independent of hosted cluster policies.
- Multiple audit policies can be defined in a hosted cluster, independent of the management cluster policies.
  See [api-audit-log-policy](/api-audit-log-policy.md) for how the CLO will support this.
- Allow some forwarding in the _management_ cluster to be configured from the _hosted_ cluster.
- Keep direct control of management cluster forwarding on the management cluster.
  - hosted cluster has no direct access to control plane configuration.
  - data plane resources can request forwarding by the management cluster.

>   - management cluster HLO automatically validates data-plane requests, and enables them if they are safe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - management cluster HLO automatically validates data-plane requests, and enables them if they are supported.
```
